Supreme Court’s Tariff Ruling Is Secretly a Gift to Trump
Mindful of voters’ concerns about inflation, the administration may not rush to bring back all the duties.

President Donald Trump was quick to vent his anger at the Supreme Court’s rebuke of his use of emergency powers to impose the largest increase in US tariffs since the 1930s. At a press conference following today’s widely anticipated decision, the president called the justices who ruled against his duties “very unpatriotic and disloyal to our Constitution.” Ahead of the ruling, which invalidated his use of a 1977 statute to roll out the import taxes responsible for almost two-thirds of the $200 billion in tariff revenue collected in 2025, Trump warned that curtailing his tariffing power would unleash an economic crisis akin to the 1929 crash. He said it would mean forgoing trillions of dollars that could help pay off America’s huge public debt. A decision against him would even hinder his efforts to bring about world peace, he said.

The ruling by a 6-3 majority is aimed right at Trump’s favorite power tool. By putting boundaries on a US president’s emergency powers, the high court has defanged Trump. It’s taken away his ability to credibly threaten to rapidly impose tariffs on European nations opposing his plan to annex Greenland or on countries doing business with Iran. And more broadly, it’s put the world on notice that Trump does face some domestic constraints on his ambitions to bend other countries to his will.

What’s been left unsaid by the White House in the wake of Trump’s loss before a Supreme Court stacked with his appointees, though, is that this decision presents the administration with an opportunity. What at the moment looks like an embarrassing setback creates an opening for Trump to recalibrate his tariffs, which polls show are unpopular with voters. A December NPR-PBS News-Marist poll found that only 36% of Americans approved of Trump’s handling of the economy, with two-thirds concerned about the impact of tariffs on their finances.

To be clear, even if Trump is losing some of the leverage that he prizes, the tariffs aren’t entirely going away. As administration officials and trade experts have said repeatedly, the president can draw on other authorities to reconstitute his tariff wall in the weeks to come—even if none give him the sweeping, unilateral and immediate powers of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act. That’s the statute Trump invoked to enact his “Liberation Day” tariffs, a usurpation of Congress’ taxation powers that the Supreme Court has now ruled unconstitutional.

The reality is that even before the court decision, Trump had started to quietly peel back some of the import taxes, in response to a public outcry over rising grocery bills and lobbying from chief executive officers. The administration is now revisiting how it applies steel and aluminum duties with an eye to reducing the impact on consumer goods, from canned drinks to underarm deodorant. On New Year’s Eve, as Trump hosted a party at Mar-a-Lago, the administration said it was delaying new tariffs on kitchen cabinets and furniture. In November, import taxes on bananas, beef, coffee, chocolate and other imported foods were removed. The White House has delayed the rollout of semiconductor and pharmaceutical tariffs that would raise the cost of imported consumer electronics and drugs. Trump has also pledged to send out $2,000 “tariff dividend” checks to all but the richest Americans and announced a $12 billion aid package to compensate farmers for lost exports.

Administration officials insist a reboot was always likely in such a big economic project and shouldn’t be taken as a retreat as they cut trade deals with other countries. “From the outset of these negotiations, at least internally, there’s been a view that there would be recalibrations at some point,” said US Trade Representative Jamieson Greer at a Dec. 10 event at the Atlantic Council, a Washington think tank. Greer also noted, however, that the administration remained committed to using tariffs to manage economic relationships and bring down the trade deficit. “I’m confident that with other tools we have related to unfair trading practices we can produce the tariff rates we need,” he said.

The most likely scenario in the weeks ahead, many trade experts agree, is that the administration will unleash a Plan B to repair a significant part of Trump’s tariff wall. But people close to the administration and some veterans of his first-term trade wars also say that even if Trump introduces new duties on specific countries or products, the US average applied tariff rate, which in the past year rose from around 2% to more than 15% before the ruling, is unlikely to go any higher. “Have we reached peak tariffs overall? Probably. I think so,” says Everett Eissenstat, who led the work on international economics for Trump’s first-term National Security Council and is now a partner at the law firm Squire Patton Boggs.

If Trump doesn’t pivot, the Supreme Court’s ruling alone would lower the US’s effective applied rated from about 14% to 6.5%, according to Bloomberg Economics estimates. Kelly Ann Shaw, who helped shape Trump’s first-term trade policy and is now a partner at the law firm Akin Gump, says she expects the tariff rate to return to around 15% once the administration rolls out Plan B, though she anticipates more tinkering rather than dramatic policy moves this year.

Although much of the debate around Trump’s duties has focused on the impact they had on prices and inflation, their effect on growth is potentially the most corrosive, economists say. The drag on the economy caused by the tariffs’ impact on companies’ costs and expansion and hiring plans has been masked by an investment boom in data centers and other infrastructure related to artificial intelligence, aided by the fact that many of the key imports (including servers) that go into them are exempted from tariffs. Strip that away, though, and the US economy looks much more fragile.

Kent Smetters of the Penn Wharton Budget Model argues that contrary to what Trump claims, the tariffs made the US less attractive for investment, because they raise the cost of doing business. “There’s very little evidence that a big renaissance of US production is happening,” Smetters says. He likens the tariffs to a huge increase in the corporate tax rate, only a more disruptive one. Trump’s original Liberation Day tariffs would’ve been akin to raising the US corporate tax rate from 21% to 36%, he says, and reduced profits by the same amount.

Economists have also started quantifying the effect of tariffs on job growth. A study by researchers at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City estimates that the direct impact of the new import taxes was 19,000 fewer jobs each month from January to August 2025—a figure that probably understates the full effects of the duties, they noted.

Mac Harman, CEO of Balsam Brands Inc., says his company stocked up on the artificial Christmas trees it sells before the 2025 tariffs went into effect, meaning its business managed to get ahead of last year’s holiday rush. Even before the Supreme Court decision, he saw a potential win for Trump if the justices ruled against the president. Refunding the $140 billion in revenue collected from the Liberation Day duties would be a meaningful increase for the economy, Harman says. Also, businesses wouldn’t have to set aside money to pay tariffs this year, which might also serve as a stimulus.

Faced with the cost of tariffs and the uncertainty they caused, companies slowed down hiring or held off on building new plants. “That’s all going to change,” Harman says. For Balsam Brands it means hitting targets and paying bonuses. “And that would go straight into the economy.”

It’s not just businesses that stand to benefit from the high court’s ruling. If Trump doesn’t replace the invalidated tariffs, analysts at the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center estimate it would mean an average boost to real incomes of $1,200 per family in 2026. At $100 per month, that’s “less than your typical cable bill,” says Robert McClelland, a senior fellow at the center. But “it is definitely not nothing. And I think for people who are seeing a lot of stress from increased prices, it would certainly be welcome.”

All that said, Trump, of course, hasn’t shown any public signs of bending to the political realities. He remains enamored of tariffs. And he’s not exactly known for backing away from a fight or losing one gracefully.

